I know the answer to this, too, because I've heard you say it, but anyhow, I
know the listeners are going to want to know this.
At the end of White Gold Wielder, it seems like Covenant's dead. Can you bring
him back? Well, you know, I always want to say gone but not forgotten. One of
the things that happens in the course of White Gold Wielder is that I work very
hard to establish the idea of people who come back from the dead. Now, in the
first trilogy, there's a really crucial point which involves the breaking of the
law of death. And this is one step along the path. What this means is that
somebody in our life with enough power can essentially bring up ghosts to serve
them. Or ghosts can affect or communicate with or be present to the living now
because the law of death has been broken. But that's not, of course, the same
thing as they're being fully present or as they're being as effective as the
living or of their being to impose their wills or of their being physically
corporately. I mean, there's all kinds of degrees to these things. What happens,
among other things, in White Gold Wielder is that another barrier gets broken
down. Heil, Troy, Ian, and Leint brings Hollian back from the dead. Now, there
are various requirements which have to be present. There is an intact physical
body. You know, Sundra kept her body with him. So they have, you know, a body in
which she can be reincorporated. And the dead spirit is then refused into the
body. And this is crucial because it makes possible Covenant's victory at the
end. I mean, Covenant defeats Lord Fowl after he's been killed. Well, you know,
this character isn't going to disappear at this point. If he's strong enough to
beat Lord Fowl after he's dead, you know he's not gone. Besides, after the whole
thing's over, he and he's the one who's having a conversation with Linden and
explaining that. Now, this is a subtle point, but it's important. At the end of
The Power That Preserves, Covenant has a kind of a little conversation with the
creator during the transition back to the real world. Now, it's when Linden goes
back to the real world, it's Covenant that she's having a little conversation
with. This is not a trivial development. It has, you know, it has a lot of
implications for what may happen in the future in these stories in terms of the
adjustment of roles which is taking place. But I also did it to remind people
again and again that, yes, Covenant's body has been killed. And in terms of the
real world, he is dead. But in terms of the land, you know, that spirit lives.
His friends were alive when he got to the land. And if there's a future in which
Linden Avery goes back to the land, there's no reason why Covenant isn't going
to be there. And so the door is open for me to do what I may want to do in the
future if I ever decide to do it. What about just a brief statement on the, I
don't know, I guess the success of your books? I can't think of maybe except
with a possible exception of Tolkien, any other fantasy books that have been as
successful as yours. Well, I think that's true that except for Tolkien, there
hasn't been another one. Now, you have to keep these things in perspective. By
and large, I sell probably ten times as much as the average fantasy book. And by
and large, Tolkien sells about ten times as much as I do. You know, so there's
still Tolkien in capital letters and then there's me in fine print. But it is
true that these books have been more popular than most other fantasy that comes
out these days. And it's difficult to explain that in a lot of ways because
there are an awful lot of good writers out there writing nowadays who are doing
fantasy. I always talk about Patricia McKillop and she's done a trilogy, her
Riddle Master series. She's an astonishing writer, does wonderful work, and I
will never be able to explain to you why my books are so much more popular than
hers. But there are certain kinds of things that I think are clear. And one of
them is that I provide the epic fantasy experience that nobody else since
Tolkien does. I mean, no matter what my peers are doing in fantasy, they are not
doing it on this scale. And the scale puts a lot of pressure on in order to
write a convincing 500,000-word novel in which people don't get bored and in
which you don't lose track of what's happening and in which the writer doesn't
drop stitches and forget characters and in which it all fits together in the
end. You know, not everybody can do that. But you can do the same thing on a
short story scale. You can do the same thing on a regular novel scale. But when
you try to stretch that to 500,000 words, for a lot of people, the fact that
you're stretching, it shows. It just doesn't become – it doesn't seem natural.
It doesn't – for a lot of other writers. I think my particular talent as a
writer is that when you give me a canvas that big, I know exactly what to do
with it. You ask me to write a normal-size novel and I really have to struggle
because I have – there isn't enough room. And so things get twisted out of shape
when I try to make them fit on the picture. And I can have lots of trouble
trying to get a short story or a novel into focus. But you give me that much
room and I know what to do. So that means that from a reader's point of view, a
reader who wants to dive into something 500,000 words long and sort of revel in
it for that kind of long reading experience that you don't get from a normal
novel but you do get from Tolkien. Well, they can get that from me. It's going
to be consistent and coherent and logical and it's all going to fit together and
it's going to come out in a way that makes sense. And you can trust that from
page one in my books. And that kind of epic reading experience I think is
something that a lot of people yearn for. It comes rarely in life and it's one
reason Lord of the Rings is so popular and it's one reason why my books are
popular. Excellent. Yeah, that's very good. I hadn't thought of that but you're
right. Okay, my third one, the last one. I teach a fantasy class at Odessa
College. And whenever I can I try to use quotes from authors, you know, for the
students' benefit. And do you have any, one thing I keep trying to teach them,
tell them, convince them of the value of fantasy. Does it have a value? I mean a
student will say, oh, it's an escape literature. Forget about it. You know, it's
not the real world. Fantasy is the most fundamental form of literature in my
mind. Historically, of course, it is the
first form of literature. You know, when you go back to what has existed for two
or four thousand years, it's all fantasy. In fact, we didn't have any other kind
of literature until much more recent times. And there are reasons for that. It's
because it meets a particular need and expresses a particular side of the human
personality, which in the old days it was so obvious that that was what stories
were for. And what storytelling was for, that it never occurred to anybody to do
anything else. Then somehow or another we invented realism and we invented, you
know, storytelling, whereas the storytelling becomes a reflection of the actual
world instead of a reflection of envisioned worlds. And we've gone so far down
that road in Western literature in the past 500 years that we've reached a point
where we've forgotten that there used to be – the literature used to do
something else. But I think what literature used to do is something that we've
lost track of, not because we didn't need it, but because like everything else,
we got involved in what we were doing and we drifted away. Anyway, there's
something – there is an aspect of being human that doesn't get expressed in
realistic prose. The fact is if we're awake 18 hours a day, we spend 17 of those
hours in a fantasy world. Now, what I mean is very simple. Our imaginations,
whether we're conscious of using them or not, are the fundamental tool with
which we cope with the real world. You're sitting here listening to me talk and
you're trying to decide what your next question is going to be. That's
fantasizing. You figure out, you know, I'm late. People in another room will be
doing this and so for which I should have been there five minutes ago. That's
fantasizing. When I get home, my wife's going to yell at me, but I'm going to
tell her off. That's fantasizing. You know, everything we do, we prepare
ourselves for situations, we figure out, we solve problems, we do everything by
using our imaginations, by fantasizing. And of course, when we're asleep, we're
ruled by fantasy. The fantasy-making impulse on the part of human beings is our
fundamental survival trait. And it is one of the key things that makes us human.
And yet try to find a literature that deals with that in the realistic
mainstream.
That is an aspect of who we are that gets lost when you start writing a
literature that focuses on reflections of the real world. Now, I wouldn't, you
know, I don't claim for a second that those reflections aren't terribly
valuable. And it's a good and strong thing that we have realistic literature and
whatnot. But it's not the whole story on literature. It's not the whole story on
human beings, either as human beings or as readers. When you start writing good
fantasy, what you're doing is you're trying to turn the focus of your fiction
around from the world back into the human mind. And you're trying to reach down
into the things buried in each of our imaginations that we all have in common.
You're trying, essentially, good fantasy deals with the imagination itself. And
if I had to, you know, come up with a one-word definition of what magic is in
the Chronicles of Tom's Covenant, I would say that magic is imagination.
imagination. That's what good fantasy novels deal about, from Lord of the Rings
to my books to Patricia McKillop to anything else. It deals with the side of
being human that dreams and fantasizes and which solves problems, among other
things. The difference, of course, in a fantasy is that probably the problems
can be solved. Whereas in the real world, although you invent a solution, it
turns out not to fit the circumstances, and the circumstances can sometimes
overwhelm you anyways. But still, if you weren't inventing those kinds of
solutions, if you weren't fantasizing in your real world, you would be dead
already. The human race would have died out, you know, half a million years ago.
Somebody fantasized using a club to bring down game, and so that little branch
of, you know, ape man didn't starve to death. Somebody fantasized taking this
smoldering kind of thing and, you know, putting a little more wood on it and
building it into a fire and driving back heat and doing something with food and
whatnot. And the human race didn't starve to death. I mean, we're bloody
physically ill-equipped to cope with the world that animals cope with. We don't
have the strength. We don't have the smell. We don't have the claws. We don't
have the hide. We don't have the, you know, anything. How did puny little human
beings become the dominant species on this planet? Because we've got an
imagination. People fantasize possibilities, and those turn out to be what save
your life. That's the side of being human that fantasy novels are about, and I
don't think of it as escapism at all. I think of it as really looking at
yourself in the mirror. Excellent. Okay. Yeah, we're going to have to let you
go. That's very fine. I mean, we could talk for hours on this, but that's fine.
That's enough. That's probably two weeks' worth of shows. Listen, I would like
to send these tapes to you. Can you give me an address? Do you want me to send
them to the publisher?